Step 1: Verify the Docker Containers are Running

First, make sure the infrastructure services (ZooKeeper, Kafka, and Kafdrop) are running:

Open a terminal and run:

docker ps

You should see three active containers: zookeeper, kafka, and kafdrop. (Note: If they are not running, start them by navigating to the project root and running docker-compose up -d).

Step 2: Inspect the Kafka Topic in the Kafdrop Web UI
Open your web browser and navigate to http://localhost:9000.

This loads the Kafdrop dashboard, where you should see the order-events topic listed.
Click on the topic name to verify its structure: it will display 3 partitions (Partition 0, 1, and 2) and a message retention of 3,600,000 ms (1 hour).

Step 3: Run Consumer A (Status Tracker & State API)
Consumer A tracks the active order states and exposes an HTTP API for the dashboard.

Open a new terminal window at the project root directory.
Start Consumer A:

npm run consumer-a

You will see log messages indicating the Express HTTP server has started on http://localhost:5000 and the consumer has successfully connected and subscribed to Kafka.

Step 4: Run Consumer B (Analytics Engine)
Consumer B tracks event metrics in a separate consumer group.

Open a second terminal window at the project root directory.
Start Consumer B:

npm run consumer-b

You will see confirmation logs. Every 15 seconds, this terminal will print an formatted analytics snapshot of the event frequencies.

Step 5: Start the Frontend Dashboard Server
Open a third terminal window at the project root.
Start the static file server hosting the frontend:

npm run frontend

Open your web browser and navigate to http://localhost:3000.
You will see the dark-themed dashboard. Under Connection Status, it should show Connected (green), with a placeholder card stating "No active orders being tracked at the moment."

Step 6: Launch the Simulation (Producer) and Observe
Now, we will generate simulated order status events:

Open a fourth terminal window at the project root.
Run the producer to simulate 5 orders:

npm run producer -- --orders 5

Observe the interactions across all terminals and screens:
Producer Terminal: Prints publishing logs, e.g., [SENT] ORD-001 -> PLACED and [SENT] ORD-002 -> PLACED. It will introduce random 2–8s delays between stages.

Consumer A Terminal: Logs status updates in real-time, e.g., [UPDATE] ORD-001: PLACED -> CONFIRMED.

Consumer B Terminal: The 15-second console snapshots will display changing counts per restaurant and status types.

Browser Dashboard (http://localhost:3000): Interactive cards representing ORD-001 through ORD-005 will populate. The progress bars will advance dynamically. When an order transitions to DELIVERED, the card displays a completed status for 4 seconds before fading out and disappearing.

Project Root Directory: A state.json file will be created and overwrite itself every 10 seconds with the active order dictionary. You can open it to watch the states update.

Step 7: Try the Offset Experiment (Verify Resiliency)
This experiment demonstrates how Kafka tracks progress so that no messages are lost if a service goes down:

While the producer is actively running, go to the Consumer A terminal (Step 3) and press Ctrl+C to terminate the process.
Go to the Producer terminal (Step 6) and start a new simulation run:

npm run producer -- --orders 5

Observe that Consumer B is still running and processing these events, but the Browser Dashboard shows "Offline" under connection status because Consumer A is down.
Wait 10–15 seconds to allow the producer to send several events.

Restart Consumer A in its terminal:

npm run consumer-a

Result: Consumer A will instantly catch up, processing all the events published while it was offline. This is because Kafka stored the last processed offset for the status-tracker group, allowing it to seamlessly resume without data loss.

Run this command in your PowerShell terminal to stop all running Node.js tasks:

Stop-Process -Name node -Force

(This will free up ports 5000 and 3000 immediately by stopping Consumer A, Consumer B, and the Frontend server).